---
layout: default
title:  "x"
date:   2018-04-19 21:30:00 -0400
excerpt: petition to the english speaking/writing public to remove the letter x from the alphabet
categories: nonsense
---
# x

what is a letter? letters represent sounds. the sounds together form words. words express thoughts. 

k represents the 'k' sound, like king and kern. r represents the 'r' sound, like rigid and reality. these letters are beautiful and pure because they are one-to-one: there is, without respect to accent, a single sound represented (whether spoken in the brain or by the mouth) by these letters. 

s represents the 's' sound, like surrogate and salmon. but if followed by h, the sound is 'sh', like sheep and shaman. many other examples of these sullied letters exist -- c, p, t, etc. their relationship is one-to-many.

sometimes these relationships overlap, and that is perfectly okay, so long as all parties involved in the overlap retain some inherent value (i.e. some relationship that does not overlap). for example, c overlaps with s in 'face', which could just as well be spelled 'fase'. but c retains inherent value with 'cat', within which s has no part. but k comes along and overlaps with c in 'cat', which could just as well be spelled 'kat'. and so c is in dire straits. how can it maintain its place in our alphabet? with unspeakable grace, h joins c, and c can represent the unique sound 'ch', like chair and chisel. c is justified; c may remain.

but draw your attention to x. it comes forward with 'xylophone', but is squashed by z, which can represent that sound with ease (zylophone). x only has one more sound relationship: the crisp crackle of the x in sex and axe and oxen and taxes. is x safe? 

no, x is not safe. c, k, and s, our former protagonists, join forces now in 'cks', like cracks and tacks, and the sound is the same. in fact, c reminds us, in 'accident' c more than adequately overlaps x's meager contribution. 

there is no hope for x. its seat in our alphabet is held illegitimately. it is our responsibility -- our sacred duty -- to eliminate x and its memory from all written record and standards. there is no place for superfluity.

```
a b c d e
f g h i j
k l m n o      the new alphabet
p q r s t
u v w y z
```