---
layout: default
title:  "excerpts about life and meaning from books on the shelf at a recent airbnb"
date: 2018-10-31 10:30:00 -0400
excerpt: vonnegut, bukowski, dante, huxley, shakespeare, milton
categories: excerpts
---
## excerpts about life and meaning from books on the shelf at a recent airbnb

Sometimes I felt that I didn’t even know who I was. All right, I'm Nicky Belane. But check this. Somebody could yell out, 'Hey, Harry! Harry Martel!' and I'd most likely answer, 'Yeah, what is it?' I mean, I could be anybody, what does it matter?<sup>[1](#pulp)</sup>

Virtue? A fig! 'Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners. So that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it with many—either to have it sterile with idleness, or manured with industry—why, the power and corrigible authority of this lies in our wills. If the balance of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most prepost'rous conclusions. But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings, our unbitted lusts. Whereof I take this that you call love to be a sect or scion.<sup>[2](#othello)</sup>

"O master! what is this I hear? what race	  
Are these, who seem so overcome with woe?"   
He thus to me: "This miserable fate	  
Suffer the wretched souls of those, who lived	  
Without or praise or blame, with that ill band   
Of angels mix'd, who nor rebellious proved,	  
Nor yet were true to God, but for themselves	 
Were only.<sup>[3](#divine-comedy)</sup>

No civilization without social stability. No social stability without individual stability.<sup>[4](#brave-new-world)</sup>

I asked them the other evening to name the three most important human beings in history. They protested that the question made no sense to them. I insisted that they put their heads together anyway and give me some sort of answer, which they did. They were very sulky about the exercise. It was painful to them. They finally came up with an answer. Melody does most of the talking for them, and this is what she said in all seriousness: "You, and Jesus Christ, and Santa Claus." Hi ho. <sup>[5](#slapstick)</sup>

Said then the lost Archangel, this the seat   
That we must change for heav'n, this mournful gloom   
For that celestial light? Be it so since he    
Who now is sovereign can dispose and bid    
What shall be right. Farthest from him is best Whom reason hath equaled force hath made supreme    
Above his equals. Farewell happy fields   
Where joy forever dwells. Hail horrors Hail   
Infernal world, and thou profoundest hell  
Receive thy new possessor, one who brings   
A mind not to be changed by place or time   
The mind is its own place and in itself   
Can make a heav'n of hell, a hell of heav'n.   
What matter where if I be still the same   
And what I should be--All but less than he   
Whom thunder hath made greater. Here at least   
We shall be free. Th' Almighty hath not built   
Here for his envy will not drive us hence.   
Here we may reign supreme, and in my choice   
To reign is worth ambition, though in hell.   
Better to reign in hell than serve in Heav'n.   
But wherefore let we then our faithful friends,   
Th'associates and co-partners of our loss   
Lie thus astonished on th' oblivious pool.   
And call them not to share with us their part   
In this unhappy mansion? Or, once more,   
With rallying arms, to try what may be yet   
Regained in heav'n or what more lost in hell!<sup>[6](#paradise-lost)</sup>

As they flew over the crematorium, the plane shot upwards on the column of hot air rising from the chimneys, only to fall as suddenly when it passed into the descending chill beyond. "What a marvellous switchback!" Lenina laughed delightedly. But Henry's tone was almost, for a moment, melancholy. "Do you know what that switchback was?" he said. "It was some human being finally and definitely disappearing. Going up in a squirt of hot gas. It would be curious to know who it was–a man or a woman, an Alpha or an Epsilon. ..." He sighed. Then, in a resolutely cheerful voice, "Anyhow," he concluded, "there's one thing we can be certain of; whoever he may have been, he was happy when he was alive. Everybody's happy now." "Yes, everybody's happy now," echoed Lenina. They had heard the words repeated a hundred and fifty times every night for twelve years.<sup>[4](#brave-new-world)</sup>

Hell was what you made it.<sup>[1](#pulp)</sup>

-------
<a id="pulp">1. Pulp (Bukowski)   
<a id="othello">2. Othello (Shakespeare)   
<a id="divine-comedy">3. The Divine Comedy (Dante)   
<a id="brave-new-world">4. Brave New World (Huxley)   
<a id="slapstick">5. Slapstick (Vonnegut)   
<a id="paradise-lost">6. Paradise Lost (Milton)   
